[docs] add athena docs (#29972)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/reference/backends.mdx

  are not supported in certain regions or environments or are only supported in GovCloud.
</Admonition>

## Athena

> If you are running Teleport on AWS, you can use
> [Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena/) based audit log system that uses
> [Parquet files](https://parquet.apache.org/) stored on
> [S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) as a storage back-end to achieve High
> Availability. Athena backend supports only one type of Teleport data:
> 
> - Audit log events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are running Teleport on AWS, you can use
an [Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena/)-based audit log system that manages
[Parquet files](https://parquet.apache.org/) stored on
[S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) as a storage back-end to achieve high
availability. Athena backend supports only one type of Teleport data, audit log events.
```

> The athena audit logs backend provides better scalability and searchability in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Athena audit logs back-end provides better scalability and searchability in
```
- Capitalize proper nouns
- Use "back-end" for consistency with the rest of this page

comparison to DynamoDB.

> Athena audit logs are eventually consistent, this means that events won't be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Athena audit logs are eventually consistent. This means that events won't be
```

> immediately displayed in UI. It can take up to 1 minute until they are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
immediately displayed in the Teleport Web UI. It can take up to 1 minute until they are
```

> visible (depending on `batchMaxInterval` setting and events load).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visible (depending on the `batchMaxInterval` setting and event load).
```

> ### Infrastructure set up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Infrastructure setup
```
Suggesting "setup" since "Infrastructure setup" is a noun phrase.

> Teleport uses AWS SNS and SQS subscribed to topic, for publishing events.

Reviewer: What does "Teleport uses SQS subscribed to topic" mean?

Author: > The Auth service uses an SQS queue subscribed to an SNS topic for event
publishing.

does it sounds better?

> One of Auth instances read events in batches from SQS and converts them into
> Parquet format and sends to S3.
> During query Athena engine is use to search for events on S3, via Glue table
> which contains metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single Auth Service instance reads events in batches from SQS, converts them into
Parquet format, and sends the resulting data to S3.
During queries, the Athena engine searches for events on S3, reading metadata from a Glue table.
```

> Infrastructure can be set up using following terraform script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set up the required infrastructure to support the Athena backend with the following Terraform script:
```

<Details title="Terraform script" opened={false}>
```

> Add here terraform examples when they are merged.

Author: I will add here valid file when https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/29895 is merged, now it's making linter complaining.

```
</Details>

### Configuring the Athena audit log backend

To configure Teleport to use Athena:

- Make sure you are using **Teleport version 14.0.0** or newer.
- Prepare infrastructure

> - Use Athena URL insides `audit_events_uri` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify an Athena URL inside the `audit_events_uri` array in your Teleport configuration file:
```

```yaml
teleport:
  storage:

>     # This setting configures Teleport to send the audit events to three places:
>     # To keep a copy in Athena, a copy on a local filesystem, and also output the events to stdout.
>     # More details about full athena url are shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # This setting configures Teleport to keep a copy of the audit log in Athena and a copy on a local filesystem, and also to output the events to stdout.
    # More details about the full Athena url are shown below.
```

    audit_events_uri:  ['athena://database.table?params', 'file:///var/lib/teleport/audit/events', 'stdout://']
```

> 

Reviewer: We should introduce the URL here for readers who haven't seen the YAML comments above.

Reviewer: The example URL appears after the configuration example with no context, so it's not immediately clear why it's there. I'll add a suggestion.

> `athena://db.table?topicArn=arn:aws:sns:region:account_id:topic_name&largeEventsS3=s3://transient/large_payloads&locationS3=s3://longterm/events&workgroup=workgroup&queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name&queryResultsS3=s3://transient/query_results`

Reviewer: - This looks pretty awkward as a code-style paragraph. I'd recommend a code fence instead using:

````markdown
```
```
````

> URL hostname consist of `database.table` which points to Glue Database and Table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The URL hostname consist of `database.table`, which points to the Glue database and a table
```

> which will be used by Athena audit logger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which will be used by the Athena audit logger.
```

  are not supported in certain regions or environments or are only supported in GovCloud.
</Admonition>

## Athena

If you are running Teleport on AWS, you can use
[Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena/) based audit log system that uses
[Parquet files](https://parquet.apache.org/) stored on
[S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) as a storage back-end to achieve High
Availability. Athena backend supports only one type of Teleport data:

- Audit log events

Athena audit logs backend provides better scalability and searchability in
comparison to Dynamo.

Athena audit logs is eventually consistent, it means that events won't be
immediately displayed in Audit logs UI. It can take up to 1min until they are
visible (depending on `batchMaxInterval` setting and events load).

### Infrastructure setup

Teleport uses AWS SNS and SQS subscribed to topic, for publishing events.
One of Auth instances read events in batches from SQS and converts them into
Parquet format and sends to S3.
During query Athena engine is use to search for events on S3, via Glue table
which contains metadata.

> Infrastructure can be setup using following terraform script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Infrastructure can be set up using following terraform script.
```

    audit_events_uri:  ['athena://database.table?params', 'file:///var/lib/teleport/audit/events', 'stdout://']
```

`athena://db.table?topicArn=arn:aws:sns:region:account_id:topic_name&largeEventsS3=s3://transient/large_payloads&locationS3=s3://longterm/events&workgroup=workgroup&queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name&queryResultsS3=s3://transient/query_results`

URL hostname consist of `database.table` which points to Glue Database and Table
which will be used by Athena audit logger.

Other parameters are specified as query parameters to Athena url.

Following parameters are required:
- `topicArn=arn:aws:sns:region:account_id:topic_name` - ARN of SNS topic where events are published
- `locationS3=s3://longterm/events` - S3 bucket used for long term storage
- `largeEventsS3=s3://transient/large_payloads` - S3 bucket used for transient storage for large events
- `queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name` - SQS URL used as subscription to SNS topic
- `workgroup=workgroup_name` - Athena workgroup used for queries
- `queryResultsS3=s3://transient/results` - S3 bucket used for transient storage for query results

> Following parameters are optional:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following parameters are optional:
```

- `region=us-east-1` - AWS region, if empty defaults to one from AuditConfig or AWS Credentials
- `batchMaxItems=20000` - defines maximum number of events allowed for single parquet file (default 20000).
- `batchMaxInterval=1m` - defines maximum interval used to buffer incoming data before creating Parquet file (default 1m).

### Authenticating to AWS

The Teleport Auth Service must be able to read AWS credentials in order to
authenticate to Athena.

(!docs/pages/includes/aws-credentials.mdx service="the Teleport Auth Service"!)

The IAM role that the Teleport Auth Service authenticates as must have the
policies specified in the next section.

### IAM policies

Make sure that the IAM role assigned to Teleport is configured with sufficient
access to Athena.

(!docs/pages/includes/athena-iam-policy.mdx!)

### Migration from Dynamo to Athena audit logs backend

<Admonition
  type="tip"
  title="Tip"
>
  Migration is only needed if Dynamo audit logs was used and you want to keep
  old data.
</Admonition>

Migration consist of following steps:

> 1. Setup Athena infrastructure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Set up Athena infrastructure
```

they are visible (depending on the `batchMaxInterval` setting and event load).

### Infrastructure setup

The Auth service uses an SQS queue subscribed to an SNS topic for event
publishing. A single Auth Service instance reads events in batches from SQS,
converts them into Parquet format, and sends the resulting data to S3. During
queries, the Athena engine searches for events on S3, reading metadata from a
Glue table.

You can set up the required infrastructure to support the Athena backend with
the following Terraform script:

<Details title="Terraform script" opened={false}>
```
Add here terraform examples when they are merged.
```
</Details>

### Configuring the Athena audit log backend

To configure Teleport to use Athena:

- Make sure you are using **Teleport version 14.0.0** or newer.
- Prepare infrastructure
- Specify an Athena URL inside the `audit_events_uri` array in your Teleport
  configuration file:

```yaml
teleport:
  storage:
    # This setting configures Teleport to keep a copy of the audit log in Athena
    # and a copy on a local filesystem, and also to output the events to stdout.
    audit_events_uri:

>       # More details about the full Athena url are shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      # More details about the full Athena URL are shown below.
```

      - 'athena://database.table?params'
      - 'file:///var/lib/teleport/audit/events'
      - 'stdout://'
```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Here is an example of an Amazon Athena URL within the `audit_events_uri` configuration field:

```
````

athena://db.table?topicArn=arn:aws:sns:region:account_id:topic_name&largeEventsS3=s3://transient/large_payloads&locationS3=s3://long-term/events&workgroup=workgroup&queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name&queryResultsS3=s3://transient/query_results
```

The URL hostname consist of `database.table`, which points to the Glue database
and a table which will be used by the Athena audit logger.

> Other parameters are specified as query parameters to Athena url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other parameters are specified as query parameters within the Athena URL.
```

The following parameters are required:

> - `topicArn=arn:aws:sns:region:account_id:topic_name` - ARN of SNS topic where events are published

Reviewer: Are the values after `=` defaults or examples? I think this would be clearer as a table with three columns:
- Parameter name
- Example (or default, if the values after `=` are defaults)
- Description

Author: I have rework it to use table, also optional parameters

> - `locationS3=s3://long-term/events` - S3 bucket used for long term storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `locationS3=s3://long-term/events` - S3 bucket used for long-term storage
```

- `largeEventsS3=s3://transient/large_payloads` - S3 bucket used for transient storage for large events

> - `queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name` - SQS URL used as subscription to SNS topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `queueURL=https://sqs.region.amazonaws.com/account_id/queue_name` - SQS URL used for a subscription to an SNS topic
```

- `workgroup=workgroup_name` - Athena workgroup used for queries
- `queryResultsS3=s3://transient/results` - S3 bucket used for transient storage for query results

> Following parameters are optional:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following parameters are optional:
```

> Following parameters are optional:

Reviewer: The comment I made above about required parameters applies to these as well: I think this would be clearer as a table.

> - `region=us-east-1` - AWS region, if empty defaults to one from AuditConfig or AWS Credentials

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `region=us-east-1` - AWS region. If empty, defaults to one from the AuditConfig or ambient AWS credentials
```
Assuming this is correct

> - `batchMaxItems=20000` - defines maximum number of events allowed for single parquet file (default 20000).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `batchMaxItems=20000` - defines the maximum number of events allowed for a single Parquet file (default 20000).
```

> - `batchMaxInterval=1m` - defines maximum interval used to buffer incoming data before creating Parquet file (default 1m).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `batchMaxInterval=1m` - defines the maximum interval used to buffer incoming data before creating a Parquet file (default 1m).
```

### Authenticating to AWS

The Teleport Auth Service must be able to read AWS credentials in order to
authenticate to Athena.

(!docs/pages/includes/aws-credentials.mdx service="the Teleport Auth Service"!)

The IAM role that the Teleport Auth Service authenticates as must have the
policies specified in the next section.

### IAM policies

Make sure that the IAM role assigned to Teleport is configured with sufficient
access to Athena. Below you can find the IAM permissions that the Auth Service
requires to use Athena Audit logs as an audit event backend.

You'll need to replace these values in the policy example below:

| Placeholder value | Replace with                                             |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| `eu-central-1`    | AWS region                                               |
| `1234567890`      | AWS account ID                                           |

> | `audit-long-term` | S3 bucket used for long term storage                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `audit-long-term` | S3 bucket used for long-term storage                     |
```

| `audit-transient` | S3 bucket used for transient storage                     |
| `audit-sqs`       | SNS topic name                                           |
| `audit-sns`       | SQS name                                                 |

> | `kms_id`          | KMS key ID used for server side encryption of SNS/SQS/S3 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `kms_id`          | KMS key ID used for server-side encryption of SNS/SQS/S3 |
```

> | `audit_db`        | Glue database name user for audit logs                   |

Reviewer: Should "user" be "used" here? "name user" seems odd to me

Author: good catch, come copy paste error, reworked to:

> Glue database used for audit logs

same for table

> | `audit_table`     | Glue table name user for audit logs                      |

Reviewer: Should "user" be "used" here? "name user" seems odd to me

        {
            "Action": [
                "sqs:ReceiveMessage",
                "sqs:DeleteMessage"
            ],
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Resource": "arn:aws:sqs:eu-central-1:1234567890:audit-sns",
            "Sid": "AllowReceiveSQS"
        },
        {
            "Action": [
                "glue:GetTable",
                "athena:StartQueryExecution",
                "athena:GetQueryResults",
                "athena:GetQueryExecution"
            ],
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:glue:eu-central-1:1234567890:table/audit_db/audit_table",
                "arn:aws:glue:eu-central-1:1234567890:database/audit_db",
                "arn:aws:glue:eu-central-1:1234567890:catalog",
                "arn:aws:athena:eu-central-1:1234567890:workgroup/audit_workgroup"
            ],
            "Sid": "AllowAthenaQuery"
        },
        {
            "Action": [
                "kms:GenerateDataKey",
                "kms:Decrypt"
            ],
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Resource": "arn:aws:kms:eu-central-1:1234567890:key/kms_id",
            "Sid": "AllowAthenaKMSUsage"
        }
    ]
}
```

> ### Migration from Dynamo to Athena audit logs backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migration from Dynamo to the Athena audit logs backend
```

<Admonition
  type="tip"
  title="Tip"
>

>   Migration is only needed if Dynamo audit logs was used and you want to keep
>   old data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Migration is only needed if you used Amazon DynamoDB for audit logs and you want to keep
  old data.
```

</Admonition>

Migration consist of following steps:

1. Set up Athena infrastructure

> 1. Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, query from Dynamo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, and query from Dynamo
```

1. Migrate old data from Dynamo to Athena

> 1. Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, query from Athena

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, and query from Athena
```

1. Disable writing to Dynamo

> In teleport storage config, `audit_events_uri` accepts multiple URLs used as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Teleport storage configuration, `audit_events_uri` accepts multiple URLs used as
```

> audit loggers. If more than 1 is used, then events are written to each audit

Reviewer: We should rewrite "URLs used as audit loggers", since the URLs themselves are not being used as audit loggers. Instead, Teleport is using these URLs to configure its connections to the different audit loggers, right?

Author: In teleport storage config, `audit_events_uri` accepts multiple URLs. Those URLs are used to configure connections to the different audit loggers. 

Is it better?

Reviewer: Yes, thanks!

system, and queries are executed from first one.

<Admonition
  type="tip"
  title="Tip"
>

>   If anything goes wrong during migration steps 1-4, rollback to Dynamo solution
>   is as trivial as making sure it's on first place inside `audit_events_uri`
>   and removing Athena URL from `audit_events_uri`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If anything goes wrong during migration steps 1-4, roll back to the Amazon DynamoDB solution by making sure its URL is the first value in the `audit_events_uri` field
  and removing the Athena URL.
```
- Suggestion for clarity
- Removing "as trivial as" since, if a user needs to read documentation to do something, it's probably not trivial

</Admonition>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these steps is explained in more detail below.

```

> #### Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, query from Dynamo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, and query from Dynamo
```

> Second step of migration requires setting following configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second step of migration requires setting the following configuration:
```

```yaml
teleport:
  storage:
    audit_events_uri: 
    - 'dynamodb://events_table_name'
    - 'athena://db.table?otherQueryParams'
```

> When auth server is restarted, you should verify that parquet files are stored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an Auth Service instance is restarted, you should verify that Parquet files are stored
```

> on S3 bucket specified using `locationS3` parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the S3 bucket specified using the `locationS3` parameter.
```

> #### Migrate old data from Dynamo to Athena

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Migrate old data from Amazon DynamoDB to Athena
```

> This step requires using client machine to export data from Dynamo and publish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step requires using the client machine to export data from Amazon DynamoDB and publish
```

> it to Athena logger. We recommend using for example EC2 instance with disk size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it to the Athena logger. We recommend using, for example, an EC2 instance with a disk size
```

> at least 2x bigger than table size in dynamo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at least 2x bigger than the table size in Amazon DynamoDB.
```

> Instructions how to use migration tool can be found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instructions for how to use the migration tool can be found
```

> [here](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/examples/dynamoathenamigration/README.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[on GitHub](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/blob/master/examples/dynamoathenamigration/README.md).
```
It's usually poor practice to use "here" as link text since it obscures the target of the link.

> You should set `exportTime` to time when dual writing was started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should set `exportTime` to the time when dual writing began.
```

> It is recommended to first run migration with `-dry-run` flag, because it
> allows to run validation of exported data. If no errors are reported, proceed
> to real migration without `-dry-run` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend running your first migration with the `-dry-run` flag because it
validates the exported data. If no errors are reported, proceed
to a real migration without the `-dry-run` flag.
```

#### Dual write to both Dynamo and Athena, query from Athena

> Change order of `audit_events_uri` in teleport configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change the order of the `audit_events_uri` values in your Teleport configuration file:
```

```yaml
teleport:
  storage:
    audit_events_uri:
    - 'athena://db.table?otherQueryParams'
    - 'dynamodb://events_table_name'
```

When auth server is restarted, you should verify that events are visible on
Audit Logs page.

> #### Disable writing to Dynamo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Disable writing to DynamoDB
```

> <Notice type="danger">
> 
> Disabling writing to Dynamo means that you won't be able to rollback to Dynamo
> without loosing data. Dual writing to both Athena and Dynamo does not have big
> performance impact and it's recommended to keep dual writing for some time, even
> if queries are done already from Athena.
> 
> </Notice>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disabling writing to DynamoDB means that you won't be able to roll back to DynamoDB
without losing data. Dual writing to both Athena and DynamoDB does not have a significant
performance impact, and it's recommended to keep dual writing for some time, even
if your system already executes queries from Athena.
```

- Removing the `Notice` tags since the `Notice` encompasses most of this section and becomes distracting.
- Grammar suggestions.

> To disable writing to Dynamo, remove dynamodb URL from `audit_events_uri` array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable writing to DynamoDB, remove the DynamoDB URL from the `audit_events_uri` array.
```

  are not supported in certain regions or environments or are only supported in GovCloud.
</Admonition>

## Athena

If you are running Teleport on AWS, you can use an
[Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena/)-based audit log system that manages
[Parquet files](https://parquet.apache.org/) stored on
[S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) as a storage back-end to achieve high

> availability. Athena backend supports only one type of Teleport data, audit log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
availability. The Athena back-end supports only one type of Teleport data, audit log
```
Using "back-end" to be consistent with the rest of this page

> availability. The Athena back-end supports only one type of Teleport data, audit log

Reviewer 3: Nit: audit events - log is not necessary here

events.

> The Athena audit logs back-end provides better scalability and searchability in

Reviewer 3: Style nit, to simplify:

The Athena audit back-end is better at scale and search than DynamoDB.

comparison to DynamoDB.

> Athena audit logs are eventually consistent. This means that events won't be

Reviewer 3: Style nit. To simplify, and use active voice more:

The Athena audit logs are eventually consistent. It may take up to one minute until you can view events in the Teleport Web UI.

immediately displayed in the Teleport Web UI. It can take up to 1 minute until
they are visible (depending on the `batchMaxInterval` setting and event load).

### Infrastructure setup

> The Auth service uses an SQS queue subscribed to an SNS topic for event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Auth Service uses an SQS queue subscribed to an SNS topic for event
```
